Kevin Ly
Prof. Alfred
ENGL 1304
25 March 2018

Is Social Media Negative For Your Mental Health?
PART I: Exploratory Narrative
	In the beginning of my research process, I had no idea what about social media I wanted to write this essay about. This essay definitely had to involve social media, but with a specific debatable question I had to suggest and answer. So, I simply opened a new tab after reading the prompt, typed in “social media” into the address bar, and pressed enter on my keyboard. This directed the search towards Google, and this was when I was presented with about 1,260,000,000 results based on the keywords of my search. I did this because I wanted to see the title of the results that came up to see if any of them interested me. I clicked on the first result Google gave me, which was a Wikipedia page on social media. I had my own interpretation on what social is, but I was curious to know the technical definition. Social media are “computer-mediated technologies that facilitate the creation and sharing of information, ideas, career interests and other forms of expression via virtual communities and networks,” which was a much smarter definition than anything I could ever come up with (Wikipedia). I returned to the results page and continued to scroll down looking at the titles. That was when I saw a title that made me stop and immediately click on it: “6 Ways Social Media Affects Our Mental Health - Forbes.” I could not find anything on this site about the title, but I did leave with something that interested me. Next, I Googled “social media mental health.” After skimming through the first few links and noticing common words like “anxiety, cyberbullying, and depression”, I decided to write about the effects that social media has on mental health. I chose this because it is something I heavily relate because of my experience with the topic. I already had an answer in mind for my research question but wanted to investigate more articles to finalize which side I would be supporting. Tired of reading articles, I went to Youtube to watch videos on the topic, where I surprisingly did not find many helpful sources that would help my essay. Most of these videos were comprised of personal stories on how social media had affected that certain individual, but I was hoping to find video on how social media has affected everyone in general. I returned back to Google and this time searched “social media negative mental health.” This was the direction I had in mind that I was going to support in my essay - that social media is more negative than positive. I found a lot of helpful articles that supported my side and is where I found articles that I will be addressing in part two. However, I did not want my essay to focus solely on the negatives of social media. To understand the negative I had to also understand the positives. Because this topic is so subjective, either side of the argument is correct, so I thought it was appropriate to research and incorporate the positive side of social media in my essay. I will also include some articles that stand “pro-social media” in my part two.

PART II: Annotated Bibliography
MacMillan, Amanda. “Why Instagram Is the Worst Social Media for Mental Health.” Time,
Time, 25 May 2017, time.com/4793331/instagram-social-media-mental-health/.

	This article is written by Amanda MacMillan who is a psychologist who surveyed “almost 1,500 teens and young adults”  asking them to rank five popular social media platforms and to provide any positive or negatives they had with each social media. These five social media platforms consisted of, in rank order, Youtube, Twitter, Facebook, Snapchat, and Instagram. The article continues by evidently explaining why Instagram was considered the worst one in terms of mental health, while comparing Instagram's cons with Youtube’s pros. Instagram associated with “increases in depression and anxiety” and promotes a “compare and despair” attitude. The next part of the article address social media as a whole, metaphorically using Instagram as a representation for all social media. It ends with proposing possible solutions to these negatives that social media bring to a person, saying that the government can implement “safe social media use” to be “taught during health education in schools.”

Pennell, Julie. “How Social Media Can Actually Help Teens Suffering from Depression and
Anxiety.” Teen Vogue, TeenVogue.com, 25 Feb. 2016,
www.teenvogue.com/story/positive-social-media-effects-on-teen-mental-health.

This article was written by Julie Pennell who wrote for the website TeenVouge. This website is a popular magazine whose audience is directed towards teens so I think this article is a credible one since teens are the largest demographic using social media and this website is for teens. However, instead of being about negatives about social media, it is actually about the positives. In the second paragraph is mentions that someone using social media for an extended amount of time will likely experience “psychological distress and suicidal thoughts.” However, Pennel saids they does not “necessarily mean that social media platforms cause these issues.” She explains that someone who is already suffering with mental health problems seek out interactions that social media offers because “they feel isolated or alone.” She then brings up an example of a teenage boy who has been going through issues with “mood disorder[s] and found solace in his interactions on social media.” He taylored his follows on his Instagram with accounts that contain posts of “positivity, support for others,” and “messages of hope.” She then ends that there are definitely negative effects of social media on mental health and provides the number for the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline.

Hurley, Katie, “Social Media and Teens: How Does Social Media Affect Mental Health?”
PsyCom.net - Mental Health Treatment Resource Since 1986,
www.psycom.net/social-media-teen-mental-health.

	This article is written by Katie Hurley who gives her readers a notice in the beginning of her article that it is split up into three different subjects: “current research, the upsides, and the downsides.” The “current research” section basically consisted of claims from a statically study from the University of Pittsburgh about social media on mental health. This study made a correlation between time and mental health. The more time someone would spend on social media, their mental health would be worse than someone who spent less time online. “The upsides” section was only two short paragraphs. The only positives this part had was that social media allows people to socialize more and for people who are often scrutinized, and in this article’s example, people considered to be LGBTQ can find support via social media.
“The downside” section was the longest part of the whole article. It was so long that the body was broken up into five sections: “focusing on likes, cyberbullying, making comparisons,  having too many fake friends, and less face time.” Basically this explained the negatives of social media into five different parts.

Scott, “Social Media and Its Impact on Mental Health.” Sternberg Clinic,
www.sternbergclinic.com.au/social-media-and-its-impact-on-mental-health/.

This article was written by Scott, no last name was given, which I am assuming is a doctor for Sternberg Clinic in Australia. Scott begins by explain how social media has began a new era into history. He explains how social media does not only affect those “who do not know a world without internet” (digital natives), but it has affect even those before social media. Social media has it risks like the “increase exposure to bullying.” The rest of the article consists of research and real life examples of how social media has affected people and even a community. Among all of the studies that were written the most interesting one was about “Rewired: The Psychology of Technology.” This study suggests that social media more people have “narcissism antisocial tendencies and aggression.” An excessive use of social media causes anxiety and depression and has been linked to “poorer achievement at school.” 

Walsh, Erin. “It's Complicated: Teens, Social Media, and Mental Health.” Psychology Today,
Sussex Publishers,
www.psychologytoday.com/blog/smart-parenting-smarter-kids/201709/its-complicated-teens-social-media-and-mental-health.

	This article is written by Eric Walsh who is an elderly psychologist. She begins with saying social media has brought new content to psychology overall. Because she lived in a time where social media did not exist, she is able to compare and contrast between the before and after. The tone of this article is very motherly because Walsh wants to protect all children from the dangers of social media. She focuses on how teens are affected by social media and how parents can help them, even if they do not have a lot of knowledge of it. She saids that the best thing to do as a parent is to “observe, stay connected, and ask questions.” She explains that when teens are feeling sad they tend to the Internet for support, but Welch urges parents for them to become that support for them instead of social media. She gives a few questions that a parent could ask their child about their relationship with social media: “why do you use social media?” and “how does it make you feel?” She also wants parents to have more face-to-face time with their child. This article was helpful because it brings up the idea that the negative of social can be prevented before it is too late.

Week, “How Bad Is Social Media for Your Mental Health?” The Week UK,
www.theweek.co.uk/checked-out/90557/is-social-media-bad-for-your-mental-health.


For this article I was unable to find an author. It began with saying that numerous amount of studies found an association between “social media use and depression, anxiety, sleep problems, eating issues, and increased suicide risk.” The rest of the article was made up of different study from an affiliation about a negative social media brigns. A study conducted by the London-based Royal Society for Public Health that Instagram, which focuses primarily on a person’s physical appearance, is “contributing to a generation of young people with body image and body confidence issues.” Another study by the American Journal of Preventive Medicine found that “the more time people spent on [social media], the more socially isolated they perceived themselves to be.” It end with saying that social media does not affect everyone equally and that some people are just more “susceptible to the [potential] negative aspects” social media brings.

PART III: Reflection and Tentative Thesis
Four of the most common stressors on social media are the highlight reel, social currency, the fear of missing out (FOMO), and online harassment. They have the potential to become full-blown mental health issues if left unchecked. This is by no means an exhaustive list. The first common stressor on social media deals with “the highlight reel”. Just like in sports, highlight reels are a collection of the best and brightest moments. Social media is our personal highlight reel. It is where we put up our wins, when we look great, or when we are out with friends or family. However, we struggle with insecurity because we compare our “behind-the-scenes” with everyone else's highlight reels. We are constantly comparing ourselves to other. It is true that this was happening before social media with TV and celebrities, but now, it’s happening all the time and is directly linked to the person. 
In fact, when your highlights do well, you encounter the second stressor on social media which is “social currency.” Currency is something we use to attribute value to a good or service. In social media, social currency comes in the form of likes, comments, and shares. Everyone is competing for your attention, and when you give something a like or a piece of that finite attention, it becomes a recorded transaction attribute value. This is great for selling tangible items, like albums or clothing. However, the problem is that in our social media, “WE are the product.” We are letting others attribute value to us by the means of social currency. Someone somewhere has taken down a photo because it did not get as many likes as they thought it would. They essentially took their product off the shelf because it was not selling fast enough. This is changing our sense of identity. We are correlating our-self worth with what others think about us, quantifying it for everyone to see. And the problem is, we are obsessed with this. We have to get that perfect selfie, and we will take numerous photos to make it happen. We are so obsessed that we have biological responses when we cannot participate, which leads to the third stressor on social media which is the fear of missing out. 
FOMO, or the “fear of missing out”, is an actual social anxiety from the fear that you are missing a potential connection, event, or opportunity. But, what if what happens on social media everyday was a terrifying experience, where you not only question your self worth but also your safety? Perhaps the worst stressor on social media is number four which is online harassment. 40% of online adults have experienced online harassment and 73% have witnessed it. When these micro-moments happen over and over again, over time it eventually becomes a macro problem. Regarding social media, we are already experiencing mental and physical impairments similar to substance dependencies. With every like, you get a shot of that feel-good chemical, dopamine. You gain more of that social currency. So what do we do to feel good? We post so we can show our highlight reels and we check likes, refreshing until another pops up on the screen. And when a post is exhausted of likes, we post another which and then another and then another.
Does this not sound like the effects of every drug you have ever heard of, more specifically does this not sound like addition? 
When that grows, when your social media use goes unconfronted overtime, we see the rising levels of anxiety and depression, the distractions, the highlight reels, the comparisons; it happens in large quantities most of the time. Social media is just the most recent tool we use to do what humanity has always done: tell stories and communicate with everyone. However, social media like does not make people write hateful posts. When we talk about this dark side of social media, we are really talking about is the dark side of people. That dark side that makes harassers harass, that generates insecurity that makes you take down a photo you were excited to share, and that looks at a picture of happy family and wonders why yours does not look like that. This dark side is what we need to focus on. So, is social media hurting your mental health? The answer is absolutely - but it does not have to. Social media can tear you down, yes, or it can lift you up, where you leave feeling better off, or having an actual laugh-out-loud moment. 
	
	

